Early Prediction of Sepsis from Clinical Data: the
PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2019
Matthew A. Reyna, PhD 1, Christopher S. Josef, MD 1, Russell Jeter, PhD 1, Supreeth P.
Shashikumar2,3, M. Brandon Westover, MD, PhD 4, Shamim Nemati, PhD 1,3,*, Gari D. Cliﬀord,
DPhil1,2,*, and Ashish Sharma, PhD 1,*
1Department of Biomedical Informatics, Emory University
2Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
3Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of California San Diego
4Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital
*The senior authors contributed equally to this manuscript.
14 October 2019
This work was funded by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation. GC, SN, MR and RJ are partially
funded by the National Science Foundation under award number 1822378 (Leveraging Heterogeneous Data
Across International Borders in a Privacy Preserving Manner for Clinical Deep Learning). SN and SPS
are also funded by the NIH award #K01ES025445. CSJ is funded by the Surgical Critical Care Initiative
(SC2i), sponsored by the Department of Defense Health Program Joint Program Committee 6 / Combat
Casualty Care (USUHS HT9404-13-1-0032 and HU0001-15-2-0001) and was supported by a grant from the
National Institutes of Health, USA (NIH Grant 5T32GM095442-09). AS and the development of the cloud-
based scoring system were partially supported by the National Cancer Institute (U24CA215109). This work
was also supported by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes
of Health under Award Number UL1TR002378 and the National Institutes of Health-sponsored Research
Resource for Complex Physiologic Signals (www.physionet.org) (R01GM104987). The content of this article
is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the oﬃcial views of the National
Institutes of Health. The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
For information regarding this article, please contact MR. Address: Department of Biomedical Informatics,
Emory University, Woodruﬀ Memorial Research Building, 101 Woodruﬀ Circle, 4th Floor East, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. Phone: (404)-727-4631. Email: matthew.a.reyna@emory.edu.
1Abstract
Objectives: Sepsis is a major public health concern with signiﬁcant morbidity, mortal-
ity, and healthcare expenses. Early detection and antibiotic treatment of sepsis improve
outcomes. However, while professional critical care societies have proposed new clin-
ical criteria that aid sepsis recognition, the fundamental need for early detection and
treatment remains unmet. In response, researchers have proposed algorithms for early
sepsis detection, but directly comparing such methods has not been possible because of
diﬀerent patient cohorts, clinical variables and sepsis criteria, prediction tasks, evalua-
tion metrics, and other diﬀerences. To address these issues, the PhysioNet/Computing
in Cardiology Challenge 2019 facilitated the development of automated, open-source
algorithms for the early detection of sepsis from clinical data.
Design: Participants submitted containerized algorithms to a cloud-based testing en-
vironment, where we graded entries for their binary classiﬁcation performance using a
novel clinical utility-based evaluation metric. We designed this scoring function specif-
ically for the Challenge to reward algorithms for early predictions and penalize them
for late or missed predictions and for false alarms.
Setting: ICUs in three separate hospital systems. We shared data from two systems
publicly and sequestered data from all three systems for scoring.
Patients: We sourced over 60,000 ICU patients with up to 40 clinical variables for
each hour of a patient’s ICU stay. We applied Sepsis-3 clinical criteria for sepsis onset.
Measurements and Main Results: 104 groups from academia and industry par-
ticipated, contributing 853 submissions. Moreover, 90 abstracts based on Challenge
entries were accepted for presentation at Computing in Cardiology.
Conclusions: Diverse computational approaches predict the onset of sepsis several
hours before clinical recognition, but generalizability to diﬀerent hospital systems re-
mains a challenge.
Key W ords: sepsis; early detection and treatment; generalizability; evaluation met-
rics; sequential prediction tasks; open-source algorithms; competition; PhysioNet
21 Introduction
Sepsis is a life-threatening condition that occurs when the body’s response to infection causes
tissue damage, organ failure, or death [1, 2, 3]. In the U.S., nearly 1.7 million people develop
sepsis and 270,000 people die from sepsis each year; over one-third of people who die in
U.S. hospitals have sepsis [4]. Globally, an estimated 30 million people develop sepsis and
6 million people die from sepsis each year [5]. Costs for managing sepsis in U.S. hospitals
exceed those for any other health condition at $24 billion annually (13% of U.S. healthcare
expenses); a majority of these costs are for patients who develop sepsis during their hospital
stay [6]. The developing world faces additional expenses from sepsis management and higher
risks of adverse outcomes. Altogether, sepsis is a major public health issue responsible for
signiﬁcant morbidity, mortality, and healthcare expenses [7, 8, 9, 10].
The reliable and early identiﬁcation of sepsis is often complicated by its syndromic nature,
which can contribute to delays in treatment. The importance of early identiﬁcation and
treatment of sepsis is highlighted in two recent studies that suggest an increase in the adjusted
mortality of septic patients who experienced delays in antibiotic therapy [11, 12]. This eﬀect
is even more profound in patients suﬀering from septic shock, where hourly delays were
associated with an 3.6-9.9% increase in mortality per hour [13]. Professional critical care
societies have proposed clinical criteria for recognizing and treating sepsis [1, 2, 3]; however,
the fundamental need for early and reliable identiﬁcation of sepsis remains unmet [14].
The PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge is an international competition fo-
cused on open-source solutions for complex physiological signal processing and medical clas-
siﬁcation problems [15]. In 2019, the Challenge’s 20th year, we asked participants to develop
automated techniques for the early detection of sepsis from clinical data.
Computational approaches promise to improve the early detection of sepsis. Such ap-
proaches typically apply machine learning techniques to clinical data, e.g., [16, 17, 18], with
3the goal of making real-time predictions up to a day before clinical recognition of sepsis.
However, the relative strengths and weaknesses of algorithmic approaches are unclear for a
variety of reasons. The PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2019 provided an
opportunity to explore the limits of such approaches.
First, algorithms for the early detection of sepsis frequently address subtly diﬀerent prob-
lems, and they tend to have been developed and tested in diﬀerent patient cohorts with
diﬀerent clinical variables and labels arising from diﬀerent clinical criteria for sepsis. For the
Challenge, we provided a common problem statement using the same clinical variables and
sepsis criteria. We shared data from two separate hospital systems and sequestered data
from a third hospital system. Algorithms that overﬁt on the shared databases typically un-
derperformed on the hidden database, particularly if they encoded data collection behaviors
speciﬁc to a given hospital system. Moreover, we ran algorithms only once on the full hidden
dataset to prevent sequential training on the hidden data, and we compared algorithms to
identify teams that attempted to circumvent the rules and have more “bites of cherry” than
other teams.
Second, diﬀerent studies often employ diﬀerent evaluation metrics, and such metrics do
not necessarily reﬂect the clinical utility of sepsis detection and treatment. Traditional
scoring metrics, such as area under the curve (AUC) metrics, do not explicitly reward early
detection or penalize false alarms or overtreatment. For the Challenge, we devised a novel
evaluation metric that addresses these issues and could be generally applicable to predicting
infrequent events in time series data.
Third, the complexity of such algorithms is nearly impossible to adequate describe in
a research article. For the Challenge, we encouraged and facilitated the open sourcing of
algorithms to ensure that subtle implementation details are provided and reproducible.
In this paper, we begin with the Challenge objective of early predictions of sepsis, the
Challenge data and clinical criteria for sepsis, and a new evaluation metric that reﬂects
4the clinical utility of early sepsis predictions. We continue with the Challenge submission
procedure, the results of the Challenge, and a discussion of computational approaches for
early predictions of sepsis.
2 Methods
2.1 Challenge Objective
The goal of this Challenge was the development of algorithms for the early prediction of
sepsis using routinely available clinical data. Early predictions of sepsis are potentially life
saving, while late or missed predictions are potentially life threatening, and false alarms
consume hospital resources and erode trust in the algorithms themselves [19].
For this Challenge, we asked participants to design and implement working, open-source
algorithms that can, based only on the provided clinical data, automatically identify a pa-
tient’s risk of sepsis and make a positive or negative prediction of sepsis for every hourly
time window in the patient’s clinical record. In particular, we asked participants to predict
sepsis at least six hours (but no more than twelve hours) before the onset time of sepsis
according to Sepsis-3 clinical criteria [1, 2, 3]. To evaluate each algorithm, we designed a
new clinical utility-based scoring metric that rewards algorithms for early sepsis predictions
and penalizes them for late and missed sepsis predictions as well as for false alarms. The
winners of this Challenge were the team whose algorithm gave predictions with the highest
clinical utility score for patients in a hidden test set across three hospital systems.
We awarded prizes to teams with winning algorithms. While we allowed both non-
commercial and commercial entities to enter, only open-source entries were eligible for prizes.
All code was required to be submitted to ensure that methods were replicable and because
no teams had access to the hidden data. This allowed for the comparison of winning teams
with commercial entities and increased the competitive landscape.
52.2 Challenge Data
We obtained the data for the Challenge from three geographically distinct U.S. hospital
systems with three diﬀerent electronic medical record systems: Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center (hospital system A), Emory University Hospital (hospital system B), and a third,
unidentiﬁed hospital system (hospital system C). These data were collected over the past
decade with approval from the appropriate Institutional Review Boards. We de-identiﬁed
and labeled the data using Sepsis-3 clinical criteria [1, 2, 3]. Data and labels for 40,336
patients from hospital systems A and B were posted publicly for download and data and
labels for 24,819 patients from hospital systems A, B, and C were sequestered as hidden test
sets.
The Challenge data consisted of a combination of hourly vital sign summaries, lab values,
and static patient descriptions. In particular, the data contained 40 clinical variables: 8 vital
sign variables, 26 laboratory variables, and 6 demographic variables; Table 1 describes these
variables. Altogether, these data included over 2.5 million hourly time windows and 15
million data points.
Data extracted from the Electronic Medical Record (EMR) underwent a series of pre-
processing steps prior to formal analysis and model development. All patient features were
condensed into hourly bins simplifying model development and testing, e.g., multiple heart
rate measurements in an hourly time window were summarized as the median heart rate
measurement. Multiple Logical Observation Identiﬁers Names and Codes (LOINC) codes
describing the same clinical parameter were condensed into a single variable, e.g., serum
hemoglobin and arterial hemoglobin became hemoglobin.
We labeled patient data in accordance with Sepsis-3 clinical criteria [1, 2, 3]. For each
septic patient, we speciﬁed the following three time points to deﬁne the onset time tsepsis of
sepsis:
6Measurement Description
1 HR Heart rate (beats per minute)
2 O2Sat Pulse oximetry (%)
3 Temp Temperature (deg C)
4 SBP Systolic BP (mm Hg)
5 MAP Mean arterial pressure (mm Hg)
6 DBP Diastolic BP (mm Hg)
7 Resp Respiration rate (breaths per minute)
8 EtCO2 End tidal carbon dioxide (mm Hg)
9 BaseExcess Excess bicarbonate (mmol/L)
10 HCO3 Bicarbonate (mmol/L)
11 FiO2 Fraction of inspired oxygen (%)
12 pH pH
13 PaCO2 Partial pressure of carbon dioxide from arterial blood (mm Hg)
14 SaO2 Oxygen saturation from arterial blood (%)
15 AST Aspartate transaminase (IU/L)
16 BUN Blood urea nitrogen (mg/dL)
17 Alkalinephos Alkaline phosphatase (IU/L)
18 Calcium Calcium (mg/dL)
19 Chloride Chloride (mmol/L)
20 Creatinine Creatinine (mg/dL)
21 Bilirubin direct Direct bilirubin (mg/dL)
22 Glucose Serum glucose (mg/dL)
23 Lactate Lactic acid (mg/dL)
24 Magnesium Magnesium (mmol/dL)
25 Phosphate Phosphate (mg/dL)
26 Potassium Potassiam (mmol/L)
27 Bilirubin total Total bilirubin (mg/dL)
28 TroponinI Troponin I (ng/mL)
29 Hct Hematocrit (%)
30 Hgb Hemoglobin (g/dL)
31 PTT Partial thromboplastin time (seconds)
32 WBC Leukocyte count (count/L)
33 Fibrinogen Fibrinogen concentration (mg/dL)
34 Platelets Platelet count (count/mL)
35 Age Age (years)
36 Gender Female (0) or male (1)
37 Unit1 Administrative identiﬁer for ICU unit (MICU); false (0) or true (1)
38 Unit2 Administrative identiﬁer for ICU unit (SICU); false (0) or true (1)
39 HospAdmTime Time between hospital and ICU admission (hours since ICU admission)
40 ICULOS ICU length of stay (hours since ICU admission)
41 SepsisLabel For septic patients, SepsisLabel is 1 if t ≥ tsepsis −6 and 0 if t < t sepsis −6.
For non-septic patients, SepsisLabel is 0.
Table 1: Clinical time series data used for the Challenge: vital signs (rows 1-8), laboratory
values (rows 9-34), demographics (rows 35-40), and outcome (row 41).
7• tsuspicion: Clinical suspicion of infection identiﬁed as the earlier timestamp of intravenous
(IV) antibiotics and blood cultures within a given time interval. If IV antibiotics were
given ﬁrst, then the cultures must have been obtained within 24 hours. If cultures were
obtained ﬁrst, then IV antibiotic must have been ordered within 72 hours. In either
case, IV antibiotics must have been administered for at least 72 consecutive hours.
• tSOF A: Occurrence of organ failure as identiﬁed by a two-point increase in the Sequential
Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score within a 24-hour period.
• tsepsis: Onset of sepsis identiﬁed as the earlier of tsuspicion and tSOF A as long as tSOF A
occurred no more than 24 hours before or 12 hours after tsuspicion.
Missing and erroneous data were intentionally preserved as part of the Challenge. How-
ever, patients with less than 8 hourly time windows of data in the ICU were not included,
and patients with tsepsis less than 4 hours after ICU admission were not included. Patient
records were truncated after ICU discharge, and patients with more than 2 weeks of hourly
time windows were truncated to 2 weeks.
Table 2 summarizes the datasets for the two shared hospital databases. Fig. 1 shows the
densities of entries (i.e., the fraction of non-empty hourly measurements) for each vital sign
and laboratory value in each patient record; most vital signs were updated on an hourly
basis in most patient records, and most laboratory values were updated on a daily basis.
Fig. 2 shows the distributions of these entries across patient records. Fig. 3 quantiﬁes the
diﬀerence between the vital sign and laboratory value distributions between hospital systems
using Jensen-Shannon divergence. Note that most clinical variables have similar distributions
across hospital systems.
80.0
0.5
1.0
Entry density for
hospital system A
0.0
0.5
1.0
Entry density for
hospital system B
HR
O2Sat
Temp
SBP
MAP
DBP
Resp
EtCO2
BaseExcess
HCO3
FiO2
pH
PaCO2
SaO2
AST
BUN
Alkalinephos
Calcium
Chloride
Creatinine
Bilirubin-direct
Glucose
Lactate
Magnesium
Phosphate
Potassium
Bilirubin-total
TroponinI
Hct
Hgb
PTT
WBC
Fibrinogen
Platelets
Clinical variables
0.0
0.5
1.0
Entry density for
hospital system C
Figure 1: Densities of vital sign (rows 1-8) and laboratory value (rows 9-34) entries (fraction
of non-empty entries) in the shared and hidden datasets for hospital systems A, B, and C.
950 100
HR
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
90 100
O2Sat
35.0 37.5
Temp
100 200
SBP
50 100
MAP
50 100
DBP
20 40
Resp
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
0 50
EtCO2
−10 0 10
BaseExcess
20 40
HCO3
0.5 1.0
FiO2
7.25 7.50
pH
25 50 75
PaCO2
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
50 100
SaO2
0 5000
AST
0 100
BUN
0 500
Alkalinephos
5 10
Calcium
100 125
Chloride
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
0 10
Creatinine
0 25
Bilirubin-direct
100200300
Glucose
0 20
Lactate
2 4
Magnesium
5 10
Phosphate
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
2.5 5.0
Potassium
0 25
Bilirubin-total
0 200
TroponinI
25 50
Hct
10 15
Hgb
100 200
PTT
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
0 25
WBC
250500750
Fibrinogen
0 500
Platelets
50 100
Age
0 1
Gender
0 1
Unit1
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
0 1
Unit2
−500 0
HospAdmTime
0 200
ICULOS
Hospital System
A
B
C
Figure 2: Distributions of vital sign (rows 1-8), laboratory value (rows 9-34), and demo-
graphic (rows 35-40) entries in the shared and hidden datasets for hospital systems A, B,
and C; values below 0.5% or above 99.5% of each distribution not shown.
10Hospital system A B
Number of patients 20,336 20,000
Number of septic patients 1,790 1,142
Sepsis prevalence 8.8% 5.7%
Number of rows 739,663 684,508
Number of entries 5,536,849 4,950,064
Density of entries 20.6% 19.1%
Table 2: Summary of vital sign (rows 1-8 in the data set) and laboratory value (rows 9-34)
data in the shared datasets for hospital systems A and B.
HR
O2Sat
Temp
SBP
MAP
DBP
Resp
EtCO2
BaseExcess
HCO3
FiO2
pH
PaCO2
SaO2
AST
BUN
Alkalinephos
Calcium
Chloride
Creatinine
Bilirubin-direct
Glucose
Lactate
Magnesium
Phosphate
Potassium
Bilirubin-total
TroponinI
Hct
Hgb
PTT
WBC
Fibrinogen
Platelets
Clinical variables
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Jensen-Shannon divergence
JSD(A, B) JSD(A, C) JSD(B, C)
Figure 3: Jensen-Shannon divergence of vital sign (rows 1-8) and laboratory value (rows
9-34) distributions in the shared and hidden datasets for hospital systems A, B, C.
112.3 Challenge Scoring
We scored each algorithm’s predictions using a novel evaluation metric that we created for
the Challenge. To better capture the clinical utility of sepsis detection and treatment, this
metric rewarded algorithms for early sepsis predictions in septic patients, and it penalized
algorithms for late or missed sepsis predictions in septic patients and for sepsis predictions
in non-septic patients.
Each algorithm made a binary sepsis prediction for each hourly time window in each
patient record. To evaluate each algorithm, we ﬁrst deﬁned a score for each prediction and
then aggregated these scores over all hourly time windows and all patient records.
Given an algorithm’s prediction for an hourly time window t in a patient record s, we
deﬁne a score
U(s,t ) =



UTP(s,t ), positive prediction at time t for a septic patient s,
UFP(s,t ), positive prediction at time t for a non-septic patient s,
UFN(s,t ), negative prediction at time t for a septic patient s,
UTN(s,t ), negative prediction at time t for a non-septic patient s,
(1)
where UTP(s,t ), UFP(s,t ), UFN(s,t ), and UTN(s,t ) are illustrated in Fig. 4a for an example
septic patient and in Fig. 4b for an example non-septic patient. These scores were chosen
to reﬂect the broad clinical realities of sepsis detection and treatment, and the actual utility
values and time points in (1) and Fig. 4 can be chosen to capture the speciﬁc preferences or
trade-oﬀs of any particular hospital system.
For patients that become septic during their ICU stay, early sepsis detection tends to be
beneﬁcial. Therefore, sepsis predictions in septic patients that were at least 12 hours before
and at most 3 hours after the onset time tsepsis of sepsis were rewarded with a maximum
reward at 6 hours before tsepsis, and sepsis predictions that are more than 12 hours before
1233 36 39 42 45 48 51 54
Time t (hours)
−2
−1
0
1
Utility for
sepsis patient s
Utility functions
UTP(s, t)
UFN(s, t)
tearly toptimal tsepsis tlate
maxt UTP(s, t)
mint UFN(s, t)
(a) Clinical utility for septic patients.
33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54
Time t (hours)
−2
−1
0
1
Utility for
non-sepsis patient s
Utility functions
UFP(s, t)
UTN(s, t) (b) Clinical utility for non-septic patients.
Figure 4: Diagrams of utility of positive and negative predictions for sepsis and non-septic
patients; the time tsepsis = 48 of sepsis onset is given as an example.
tsepsis were slightly penalized. Similarly, for patients that become septic during their ICU stay,
very early predictions may be implausible or unhelpful, and late or missed septic predictions
are generally harmful. Therefore, sepsis predictions in septic patients that were more than
12 hours before tsepsis were slightly penalized, and non-sepsis predictions that were less than
6 hours before tsepsis were increasingly penalized.
For patients that do not become septic during their ICU stay, sepsis predictions contribute
to alarm fatigue and lower conﬁdence in algorithms, antibiotic overuse, and overall poor
allocation of hospital attention and resources. Therefore, sepsis predictions in non-septic
patients were slightly penalized. Similarly, non-sepsis predictions in non-septic patients were
neither rewarded nor penalized.
Given an algorithm’s predictions for all hourly time windows T (s) in each patient record
s, we deﬁne total score for an algorithm as the sum
Utotal =
∑
s∈S
∑
t∈T (s)
U(s,t ) (2)
over all predictions. For easier interpretability, we normalize (2) so that the optimal al-
gorithm with the highest possible score receives a normalized score of 1 and a completely
inactive algorithm that only makes non-sepsis predictions receives a normalized score of 0,
13i.e.,
Unormalized = Utotal −Uno predictions
Uoptimal −Uno predictions
. (3)
Each algorithm received a score from (3), and the algorithm with the highest value of (3)
on the full sequestered dataset from hospital systems A, B, and C won the Challenge.
2.4 Challenge Submissions
Challenge participants submitted their algorithms for evaluation on the sequestered data.
This strategy encouraged reproducibility and gave participants the ability to validate their
algorithms on real-world datasets.
Each team was allowed a total of 5 scored entries during an unoﬃcial phase of the
Challenge from February 8, 2019 to April 14, 2019. This phase allowed for beta testing
and socialization of the submission system, rules, and scoring mechanism, and teams were
required to submit at least one entry during the unoﬃcial phase for Challenge eligibility.
Subsequently, each eligible team was allowed a total of 10 scored entries during the oﬃcial
phase of the Challenge from April 25, 2019 to August 25, 2019. This phase allowed teams
to submit their models for evaluation on test data from hospital system A; scoring on the
full hidden test data occurred only after the oﬃcial phase at the end of the Challenge. This
limit also improved the tractability of the Challenge. Since we did not heavily restrict the
languages and libraries that teams could use, many teams required technical support for
their submissions.
The submission system relied on containers that were orchestrated, as pipelines, on the
Google Cloud Platform; Fig. 5 illustrates this system. A container is a standard unit of soft-
ware that packages code and its dependencies so that the application runs readily and reliably
in diﬀerent computing environments. For the Challenge, we used the Docker containerization
environment. Participants packaged their entries and uploaded them to a GitHub reposi-
14Figure 5: 1. Participants submitted Dockerﬁles that contain recipes for creating container-
ized versions of their algorithm. 2. The submission system converted these Dockerﬁles to
containers and submitted them to the Google Container Registry. 3. An orchestration sys-
tem, Cromwell, was used to retrieve the algorithm container and the containerized scoring
function from the container registry and orchestrated them on the Google Compute Engine.
The two containers ran as a pipeline. Cromwell and the submission system interfaced with
the Compute Engine to launch the pipeline with the sequestered test dataset, and multiple
pipelines could be executed in parallel. 4. The scores from the various pipelines were saved
to a cloud database which drove a publicly accessible leaderboard.
tory, which was shared privately with the Challenge organizers. For each submission, the
submission system cloned the repository, created a pipeline that consisted of the entry and
our scoring function, and launched this pipeline on Google Cloud. This system allowed us to
score multiple entries in parallel. During the unoﬃcial and oﬃcial phases of the Challenge,
we processed over a thousand submissions in Julia, MATLAB, Python, and R from over a
hundred participants.
Each entry was run in a virtual machine (VM) with 2 CPUs and 12 GB of RAM, and
each entry was allowed 24 hours of run time on each hidden test set. The submission system
orchestrator, Cromwell, typically requested a n2-highmem-2 machine type on Google Cloud.
152.5 Implementations of Evaluation Metric and Baseline Model
To provide a baseline model, we trained a Weibull-Cox regression model and provided open-
source implementations of this model in Julia, MATLAB, Python, and R. These imple-
mentations also served as examples of how to devise a working prediction algorithm in
each language that we accepted for the Challenge. We also provided open-source imple-
mentations of our clinical utility-based scoring function. The code is available online at
https://github.com/physionetchallenges.
2.6 Analysis of Entry Independence, Collusion and Plagiarism
After the conclusion of each Challenge, we frequently build a meta-algorithm from the ﬁnal
entries that are weighted by their independence; agreement between highly similar algorithms
can suggest a false consensus of predictions. To increase the independence of algorithms, we
therefore prohibited teams from collaboration at any point of the Challenge. Speciﬁcally, we
note:
• Multiple teams from a single entity (such as a company, university, or department)
were permitted as long as the teams were truly independent and did not share team
members, code, or ideas at any point. Multiple teams from the same research group
or unit within a company were not allowed because we did not believe that true in-
dependence between teams could be maintained when team members may frequently
interact.
• New team members could join as long as they had not previously been involved with
another team or had communicated with a team member from another team concerning
this year’s Challenge.
• Teams could use public code if it had been posted before the competition. Members
16of teams were not allowed to publicly post code during the competition or use an-
other competitor’s code that was posted during the competition whether or not it was
intentionally made public.
• Members of teams were not allowed to publicly post information describing their meth-
ods or give a talk outside of their own research group at any point during the com-
petition that revealed the methods they have employed or planned to employ in the
Challenge. Members of teams were allowed to present or publish on methods on other
data as long as they did not indicate that they planned to apply it to Challenge data
until after the competition.
• Members of teams were required to use the same team name and email address through-
out the course of the competition, including for abstract submissions to the public
forum at which they defended their work, i.e., at Computing in Cardiology.
Although the rules of the Challenge strictly prohibited teams from more than 10 scored
entries during the oﬃcial phase of the Challenge, several entries from apparently diﬀerent
teams achieved exactly the same score. An investigation of their submissions showed strong
similarities between these teams, which, when questioned, either did not reply or claimed
not to have colluded. By examining associations between email addresses, team names, and
GitHub repositories, we were able to identify several prohibited collaborations. Fig. 6 illus-
trates associations between email addresses, team names, and GitHub users from Challenge
submissions, where each team was expected to have only one email address, team name, and
GitHub user. Some associations with multiple email addresses, team names, and/or GitHub
users indicated prohibited collaborations and resulted in disqualiﬁcations.
17Email Team GitHub
Figure 6: Collaboration between teams: vertices indicate email addresses, team names, and
GitHub users, and edges indicate that a participant included an email address, team name
and GitHub user as part of the same submission; multi-edges indicate multiple submissions
and are shown with thicker line weights.
18Rank Team Final Score Score A Score B Score C
1 James Morrill, Andrey Kormilitzin, Alejo
Nevado-Holgado, Sumanth Swaminathan, Sam
Howison, Terry Lyons
0.360 0.433 0.434 -0.123
2 John Anda Du, Nadi Sadr, Philip de Chazal 0.345 0.409 0.396 -0.042
3 Morteza Zabihi, Serkan Kiranyaz, Moncef Gab-
bouj
0.339 0.422 0.395 -0.146
4 Xiang Li, Yanni Kang, Xiaoyu Jia, Junmei Wang,
Guotong Xie
0.337 0.420 0.401 -0.156
5 Janmajay Singh, Kentaro Oshiro, Raghava Kr-
ishnan, Masahiro Sato, Tomoko Ohkuma, Noriji
Kato
0.337 0.401 0.407 -0.094
* Meicheng Yang, Hongxiang Gao, Xingyao Wang,
Yuwen Li, Jianqing Li, Chengyu Liu
0.364 0.430 0.422 -0.048
Table 3: Clinical utility scores for the teams with the ﬁve highest scores on the full test set
from hospital systems A, B, and C (Final Score) as well as their scores on the separate test
sets from hospital systems A, B, and C (Score A, Score B, and Score C, respectively). *
denotes the highest-scoring unoﬃcial entry.
2.7 Results
A total of 104 teams from academia and industry submitted a total of 853 entries during
the oﬃcial phase of the Challenge; of these, 88 distinct teams with a total of 430 entries
were able to be scored. Recall that each team received training data and labels for hospital
systems A and B but not for hospital system C. Each successful entry received scores on
the test data for hospital system A during the unoﬃcial and oﬃcial phases of the Challenge,
and each team nominated its favorite successful entry for evaluation on the full test data
containing patient records from hospital systems A, B, and C. Table 3 summarizes the teams
with the highest-scoring entries.
By curating clinical data from multiple hospital systems and sharing diﬀerent amounts
of data and information from these systems, we demonstrated that algorithms generally
performed much better in two hospital systems for which we provided training data than a
third hospital system for which we provided no training data.
While algorithms that performed well by one evaluation metric might be expected to
perform well by another metric, we saw that this was generally not the case for traditional
19evaluation metrics and the clinical utility score that we devised for the Challenge. Fig. 7a
compares each algorithm’s AUROC with its utility score on the test sets from each of the
hospital systems. AUROC and utility scores are positively correlated on test sets A and
B (Spearman rank correlation coeﬃcients ρ = 0.791 and ρ = 0.839, respectively). These
scores are poorly correlated on test set C (Spearman rank correlation coeﬃcient ρ = 0.054),
which corresponds to the hospital system for which participants did not receive training
data. Moreover, even on test sets A and B, algorithms with high utility scores did not
necessarily have high AUROC scores, demonstrating that traditional evaluation metrics do
not necessarily capture the clinical utility of predictions.
Moreover, the choice of evaluation metric inﬂuenced how transferable algorithms ap-
peared to be across hospital systems. Figs. 7b, 7c, 7d compare each algorithm’s AUROC or
utility score on test sets from diﬀerent hospital systems. While AUROC scores are strongly
correlated for each pair of hospital systems (Spearman rank correlation coeﬃcientsρ = 0.973
for hospital systems A and B, ρ = 0.938 for hospital systems A and C, and ρ = 0.947 for
hospital systems B and C), this is not true for utility scores. Utility scores are strongly
correlated between the two hospital systems for which we provided training data (Spearman
rank correlation coeﬃcient ρ = 0.949 for test sets A and B), but they are poorly correlated
with the third hospital system for which we did not provide training data (Spearman rank
correlation coeﬃcient ρ = −0.033 and ρ = 0.013 for hospital systems A and B, respectively,
with hospital system C). Fig. 7e further shows that the methods with the highest scores on
data from hospital systems with shared training databases were not necessarily the methods
with the highest scores on the hidden database from a separate hospital system.
Our use of clinical data from multiple hospital systems and our application of a clinical
utility-based evaluation metric provided a more nuanced view of predictive generalizability
than results on one system with traditional evaluation metrics would present.
200.0 0.5 1.0
AUROC
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Utility score
Test sets
A B C
(a) Comparison of each algorithm’s AUROC
and utility scores on test sets A, B, and C.
−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
Score on test set A
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Score on test set B
Scores
AUROC Utility
(b) Comparison of each algorithm’s AUROC
and utility scores on test sets A and B.
−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
Score on test set A
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Score on test set C
Scores
AUROC Utility
(c) Comparison of each algorithm’s AUROC
and utility scores on test sets A and C.
−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
Score on test set B
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Score on test set C
Scores
AUROC Utility
(d) Comparison of each algorithm’s AUROC
and utility scores on test sets B and C.
0 20 40 60 80
Teams (ranked from highest to lowest utility score on the full test set)
Test set C
Test set B
Test set A
Full test setTest sets
(e) Ranked performance of the ﬁnal algorithms on test sets A, B, and C. Red indicates a high overall
ranking across all three databases, and blue indicates a low overall ranking. Lines from top to
bottom indicate how the individual algorithm ranking changed when considering the performance
on each database. Algorithms that performed well on test sets A and B generally performed
relatively poorly on test set C.
Figure 7: Comparison of each algorithm’s AUROC and utility scores on test data from
hospital systems A, B, and C, where we shared training data for hospital systems A and B
but not for hospital system C.
213 Discussion
The PhysioNet/Computing in Cardiology Challenge 2019 asked participants to develop au-
tomated, open-source algorithms for the early detection of sepsis from clinical data. We
assembled over 60,000 patient records from three hospital systems, with two shared publicly
and one remaining hidden. By posting two databases publicly, we provided participants
the opportunity to create training methodologies that do not overﬁt to one medical cen-
ter. The third hidden database provided a strong indication of how well participants had
accomplished this critical task.
We also proposed and used a novel evaluation metric that captures the clinical utility of
early sepsis detection, weighted by the relative “earliness” or “lateness” of each prediction.
We suggest that this metric should be considered for wider adoption in clinical care because
it does not suﬀer from many of the problems of F -measures (and related metrics such as
accuracy, sensitivity, and positive predictive value) or standard area under the curve metrics
(such as AUROC and AUPRC), which either assume a one-shot decision or no decision
threshold, respectively. In particular, this novel evaluation metric shows that algorithms
that perform well in one hospital system may perform poorly in another.
A third novelty in this Challenge is the development of graphical and analytical ap-
proaches to measure the similarity between entries between supposedly independent Chal-
lenge teams. We identiﬁed and disqualiﬁed teams that appeared to be highly related to each
other and did not provide satisfactory explanations of these relationships.
We received 853 entries from 104 participants in academia and industry, providing a
diverse view of algorithmic approaches to early sepsis detection. Combined, these eﬀorts
provide a more complete picture of how algorithms can provide early sepsis predictions. A
subsequent analysis of the best performing and most interesting algorithms submitted to
the Challenge will combine the strengths of diﬀerent approaches to push the boundaries of
22automated approaches to early sepsis prediction.
References
[1] Christopher W. Seymour, Vincent X. Liu, Theodore J. Iwashyna, Frank M. Brunkhorst,
Thomas D. Rea, Andr´ e Scherag, Gordon Rubenfeld, Jeremy M. Kahn, Manu Shankar-
Hari, Mervyn Singer, et al. Assessment of clinical criteria for sepsis: for the Third
International Consensus Deﬁnitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). Journal of
the American Medical Association, 315(8):762–774, 2016.
[2] Mervyn Singer, Cliﬀord S. Deutschman, Christopher Warren Seymour, Manu Shankar-
Hari, Djillali Annane, Michael Bauer, Rinaldo Bellomo, Gordon R. Bernard, Jean-Daniel
Chiche, Craig M. Coopersmith, et al. The Third International Consensus Deﬁnitions
for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). Journal of the American Medical Association ,
315(8):801–810, 2016.
[3] Manu Shankar-Hari, Gary S Phillips, Mitchell L Levy, Christopher W Seymour, Vin-
cent X Liu, Cliﬀord S. Deutschman, Derek C. Angus, Gordon D. Rubenfeld, and Mervyn
Singer. Developing a new deﬁnition and assessing new clinical criteria for septic shock:
for the Third International Consensus Deﬁnitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3).
Journal of the American Medical Association , 315(8):775–787, 2016.
[4] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sepsis. https://www.cdc.gov/sepsis/
datareports/index.html, 23 August 2016. [Online; accessed 1 February 2019].
[5] World Health Organization. Sepsis. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/sepsis, 19 April 2018. [Online; accessed 1 February 2019].
23[6] Carly J. Paoli, Mark A. Reynolds, Meenal Sinha, Matthew Gitlin, and Elliott Crouser.
Epidemiology and Costs of Sepsis in the United States—An Analysis Based on Timing
of Diagnosis and Severity Level. Critical Care Medicine, 46(12):1889, 2018.
[7] Derek C. Angus, Walter T. Linde-Zwirble, Jeﬀrey Lidicker, Gilles Clermont, Joseph
Carcillo, and Michael R. Pinsky. Epidemiology of severe sepsis in the United States:
analysis of incidence, outcome, and associated costs of care. Critical Care Medicine ,
29(7):1303–1310, 2001.
[8] Greg S. Martin, David M. Mannino, Stephanie Eaton, and Marc Moss. The epidemiology
of sepsis in the United States from 1979 through 2000.New England Journal of Medicine,
348(16):1546–1554, 2003.
[9] J.L. Moran, J.A. Myburgh, G.A. Syres, D.A. Jones, P.A. Cameron, A. Higgins, S. Finfer,
S. Webb, A. Delaney, A. Cross, et al. The outcome of patients with sepsis and septic
shock presenting to emergency departments in Australia and New Zealand. Critical
Care and Resuscitation, 9(1):8, 2007.
[10] Jeremy Stoller, Laura Halpin, Matthew Weis, Brett Aplin, Weikai Qu, Claudiu
Georgescu, and Munier Nazzal. Epidemiology of severe sepsis: 2008-2012. Journal
of Critical Care, 31(1):58–62, 2016.
[11] Christopher W. Seymour, Foster Gesten, Hallie C. Prescott, Marcus E. Friedrich,
Theodore J. Iwashyna, Gary S. Phillips, Stanley Lemeshow, Tiﬀany Osborn, Kath-
leen M. Terry, and Mitchell M. Levy. Time to treatment and mortality during mandated
emergency care for sepsis. New England Journal of Medicine , 376(23):2235–2244, 2017.
[12] Vincent X. Liu, Vikram Fielding-Singh, John D. Greene, Jennifer M. Baker, Theodore J.
Iwashyna, Jay Bhattacharya, and Gabriel J. Escobar. The Timing of Early Antibiotics
24and Hospital Mortality in Sepsis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med, 196(7):856–863, October
2017.
[13] Anand Kumar, Daniel Roberts, Kenneth E. Wood, Bruce Light, Joseph E. Parrillo,
Satendra Sharma, Robert Suppes, Daniel Feinstein, Sergio Zanotti, Leo Taiberg, et al.
Duration of hypotension before initiation of eﬀective antimicrobial therapy is the critical
determinant of survival in human septic shock.Critical Care Medicine, 34(6):1589–1596,
2006.
[14] Hallie C. Prescott and Theodore J. Iwashyna. Improving Sepsis Treatment by Embrac-
ing Diagnostic Uncertainty. Annals of the American Thoracic Society , 16(4):426–429,
2019.
[15] Ary L. Goldberger, Luis A.N. Amaral, Leon Glass, Jeﬀrey M. Hausdorﬀ, Plamen Ch.
Ivanov, Roger G. Mark, Joseph E. Mietus, George B. Moody, Chung-Kang Peng, and
H. Eugene Stanley. PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: Components of a New
Research Resource for Complex Physiologic Signals. Circulation, 101(23):e215–e220,
2000.
[16] Katharine E. Henry, David N. Hager, Peter J. Pronovost, and Suchi Saria. A targeted
real-time early warning score (TREWScore) for septic shock. Science Translational
Medicine, 7(299):299ra122–299ra122, 2015.
[17] Shamim Nemati, Andre Holder, Fereshteh Razmi, Matthew D Stanley, Gari D Clif-
ford, and Timothy G Buchman. An interpretable machine learning model for accurate
prediction of sepsis in the ICU. Critical Care Medicine, 46(4):547–553, 2018.
[18] Li-Fang Cheng, Niranjani Prasad, and Barbara E. Engelhardt. An optimal policy for
patient laboratory tests in intensive care units. In Paciﬁc Symposium on Biocomputing.
Paciﬁc Symposium on Biocomputing, volume 24, pages 320–331. World Scientiﬁc, 2019.
25[19] Anton Aboukhalil, Larry Nielsen, Mohammed Saeed, Roger G. Mark, and Gari D.
Cliﬀord. Reducing false alarm rates for critical arrhythmias using the arterial blood
pressure waveform. Journal of Biomedical Informatics , 41(3):442–451, 2008.
26